---
title: 1. Discrete Mathematics
nav_order: 2
parent: SCC.121
---
# 1. Discrete Mathematics

### Examples of discrete objects
Sets, graphs, elements, functions, relations


### Why?
- Foundation for mathematics approaches to software and hardware
- Software engineering and software testing

## Sets

A *set* is a collection of unordered objects/elements/members, where there are no duplicates.

### Set Conventions
**Names:** Set names are upper case with a single letter (e.g. $A=\{ \dots \}$).
**Elements/members:** Lower case single letters (e.g. $a, b, c, \dots$).

### Set membership
If an element belongs to a certain set, we write:

$$
\text{Given } \mathbb{N}=\{1, 2, 3, \dots \}
$$
$$
1 \in \mathbb{N},
$$
meaning: "$1$ is an element of $\mathbb{N}$".

Conversely,

$$
0 \not \in \mathbb{N},
$$

means: "$0$ us not an element of $\mathbb{N}$".

So in summary,

$$
\{1, 2, 3\} \equiv \{2, 1, 3\}
$$

as sets are unordered, and

$$
\{1, 2, 2, 3, 4\} \text{ should instead be written as: } \{1, 2, 3, 4\}
$$

as sets do not contain duplicates.

### Defining larger sets

If we want to define a set $A$ of every object $x$ such that $x$ is an integer greater than $0$, we can write:

$$
A = \{x \mid x \text{ is an integer, and } x > 0\}
$$

### Set Operations

#### Union
The *union* of two sets, is the set containing all of the elements from either set. It forms a new set consisting of all the elements from either of the original sets. (Similar to logical $OR$)
If we have sets $A$ and $B$, the *union* of both sets ($U$) is:

$$
U = A \cup B = \{x \mid x \in A \text{ or } x \in B\}
$$

#### Intersection
The *intersection* of two sets, is the set consisting of all of the elements which the original sets have in common. (Similar to logical $AND$)
If we have sets $A$ and $B$, the *intersection* of both sets ($I$) is:

$$
I = A \cap B = \{x \mid x \in A \text{ or } x \in B\}
$$

#### Difference
The *difference* between two sets, is the resultant set consisting of all the elements from the first set, that are not in the second.

$$
D = A - B = \{x \mid x \in A \text{ and } x \not \in B\}
$$

#### Cartesian Product

##### Ordered pair
An *ordered pair*, is a pair of objects which order associated with them.

By convention, if objects are represented by $x$ and $y$, then they can be written as an ordered pair: $\langle x, y \rangle$

>**Note:** $\langle a, b \rangle \equiv \langle c, d \rangle \iff a \equiv c, \text{ and } b \equiv d$

$\underline{\text{Example:}}$
Let:
$$
A=\{a_1, a_2, a_3\}
$$
$$
B=\{b_1, b_2\}
$$

The cartesian product $A \times B$ is given as:

$$
\{\langle a_1, b_1 \rangle, \langle a_1, b_2 \rangle, \langle a_2, b_1 \rangle, \langle a_2, b_2 \rangle,  \langle a_3, b_1 \rangle, \langle a_3, b_2 \rangle \}
$$

So in general,

$$
A \times B = \{\langle a,b \rangle \mid a \in A, b \in B \}
$$

### Operator Precedence for Set Operations

- Union, intersection, difference, and the Cartesian product all have the same precedence
- Anything in parentheses always comes first

>**Note:** $A \cap B - C$ does not make sense, but $(A \cap B) - C$ does.