---
title: 1. Exponents and Logarithms
nav_order: 1
parent: Mathematics
---
# Exponents and Logarithms

## Exponents

An exponent is written as $a^n$, where $a$ is the *base*, and $n$ is the *power* (also known as *index* or *exponent*).

Exponents follow a set of algebraic rules:

| **Rules of Exponents**                         |
| ---------------------------------------------- |
| $a^m \cdot a^n = a^{m+n}$                      |
| $a^m \div a^n = a^{m-n}$                       |
| $(a^m)^n = a^{mn}$                             |
| $a^0 = 1$                                      |
| $a^1 = a$                                      |
| $a^{-m} = \frac{1}{a^m}$                       |
| $a^{\frac{1}{m}} = \sqrt[m]{a}$                |
| $a^{\frac{n}{m}} = (\sqrt[m]{a})^n$            |
| $(ab)^n = a^n \cdot b^n$                       |
| $\left(\frac{a}{b}\right)^n = \frac{a^n}{b^n}$ |

## Logarithms

The logarithmic function $\log_ab=x$ is the solution to the exponential equation $a^x=b$. In other words, $\log_a{b}$ gives the power to which the base $a$ needs to be raised in order to produce $b$. Therefore,

$$
\boxed{a^x = b \Longleftrightarrow \log_a{b}=x}
$$

> **Base restrictions:** Unless stated otherwise, $a>0, a\neq 1$, and $b>0$. (An exception would be for complex logarithms, for example.)

- The logarithm with base $e$ is written as $\ln{x}$ (natural logarithm).
- The logarithm with base $10$ is typically written as $\log{x}$ (common logarithm).

| **Laws of logarithms**                          |
| ----------------------------------------------- |
| $\log_a{x} + \log_a{y} = \log_a{(xy)}$          |
| $\log_a{x} - \log_a{y} = \log_a{(\frac{x}{y})}$ |
| $n \log_a{x} = \log_a{(x^n)}$                   |

### Logarithmic scales
When dealing with incredibly small or large numbers, it becomes difficult to distinguish them, so they can be scaled using logarithms.

## Euler's number and the natural logarithm

Euler's number ($e \approx 2.718\dots$) is an irrational constant, which arises in situations involving growth or decay, such as compound interest or radioactive decay.

A definition for $e$ can be found in finance, through continuous compounding:

$$
e = \lim_{n \to \infty} \left(1 + \frac{1}{n}\right)^n
$$
where $n$ is the number of compounding periods per unit time, and $e$ is the resulting constant as $n$ grows infinitely large (Euler's number).

The *natural logarithm*, written as $\ln{x}$, is the logarithm with base $e$:

$$
\boxed{\ln{x} = \log_e{x}}
$$

> **Note:** $e^x$ and $\ln{x}$ have unique properties in calculus. See **Chapter 12. Differentiation**, and **Chapter 13. Integration** for more information.