---
title: 2. Sequences and Series
nav_order: 2
parent: Mathematics
---
# 2. Sequences and Series

A numerical *sequence* is an ordered list of numbers which can often be described by a formula or recurrence relation. Each number within the sequence is called a *term*. The general term within a sequence is called the $n^{th}$ term.

A numerical *series* is the sum of a range of terms in a sequence. A *finite series* describes a series which has $n$ terms ($u_1, u_2, u_3, \dots, u_n$, where $u_n$ is the $n^{th}$ term of the sequence), and thus also has a finite sum. An *infinite series* describes a series which has infinite terms ($u_1, u_2, u_3, \dots$), which can *converge* to a finite sum or *diverge* to infinity.

*Sigma notation* can be useful when describing a series concisely. For example, the sum: $$u_1+u_2+u_3+u_4+u_5+\dots+u_{100}$$ can be rewritten using sigma notation as: 

$$\sum_{n=1}^{100} u_n$$

In general,

$$\boxed{\sum_{n=a}^{b}{u_n}}$$

represents the sum of all terms from $n=a$ to $n=b$.

Sigma notation also follows certain important algebraic properties:

**Addition Property:**

$$
\boxed{\sum_{n=1}^k{(a_n+b_n)}=\sum_{n=1}^k{a_n}+\sum_{n=1}^k{b_n}}
$$

**Constant Multiplication Property:**

Given $c$ is a constant:

$$
\boxed{\sum_{n=1}^k{c \cdot u_n} = c \cdot \sum_{n=1}^k{u_n}}
$$

## Arithmetic Sequences and Series

An *arithmetic sequence* (sometimes called an arithmetic *progression*) is a sequence where each term differs from the previous term by a constant value, called the *common difference*, typically denoted as $d$.

The general formula for the $n^{th}$ term of an arithmetic sequence is given by:

$$\boxed{u_n=u_1+(n-1)d}$$

where:
- $u_n$ is the $n^{th}$ term,
- $d$ is the common difference,
- $n$ is the position of the term (e.g., for the 5th term, $n=5$).

---

The sum of a finite *arithmetic series* is given by:

$$
\boxed{
S_n = \frac{n}{2}(u_1 + u_n)
\quad \text{OR} \quad
S_n = \frac{n}{2}\left(2u_1 + (n - 1)d\right)
}
$$

where $S_n$ is the sum of the first $n$ terms.

## Geometric Sequences and Series

A *geometric sequence* (sometimes called a geometric *progression*) is a sequence where each term is the product of the previous term and a constant value, called the *common ratio*, typically denoted as $r$.

The general formula for the $n^{th}$ term of a geometric sequence is given by:

$$\boxed{u_n=u_1r^{n-1}}$$

---

The sum of a finite *geometric series* is given by:

$$
\boxed{
S_n = \frac{u_1(r^n-1)}{r-1}
\quad \text{OR} \quad
S_n = \frac{u_1(1-r^n)}{1-r}
}
\quad \text{where} \quad r \neq 1.
$$

where $r$ is the common ratio.

If $\lvert r \rvert < 1$, the geometric series converges as $n \to \infty$, resulting in an infinite geometric series with sum:

$$
\boxed{S_{\infty}=\frac{u_1}{1-r}}
$$